SHACL on Graphs (#25)
w3c-cg/awesome-semantic-shapes: README.md

## Shape Editors, Visualizations

Editors that allow you to edit shapes in an easier way and to visualize shapes.

- [Allotrope Shape Editor](https://gitlab.com/allotrope-open-source/allotrope-devops/-/wikis/shacl-shape-editor) - The Shape Editor supports editing of shacl and shaclc files; `Apache-2.0` license; `Java`.
- [Sparna SHACL Play! Draw](https://shacl-play.sparna.fr/play/draw) - Provided visualization using PlantUML.

## Declarative UIs

> Instance data viewers/Editors based on shapes, i.e. UI Generation from shapes.

Reviewer: TBH, I don't really understand this :)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Instance data viewers/editors based on shapes, e.g., UI generated from shape definitions.
```

- [shaperone](https://github.com/hypermedia-app/shaperone) <img alt="NPM Version" src="https://img.shields.io/npm/v/@hydrofoil/shaperone-wc" align="top"> <img alt="GitHub Release Date" src="https://img.shields.io/github/release-date/hypermedia-app/shaperone" align="top"> - SHACL Shapes Form generator; [docs](https://forms.hypermedia.app); `MIT` license; `Typescript`.
  - [playground](https://forms.hypermedia.app/playground)

## IDE support

These make editing shapes within an IDE like VSCode easier.

- [Linked Data Extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=Elsevier.linked-data) - A VS Code Extension for editing RDF files with embedded SHACL validator and SPARQL engine.

> - [SHACL Language Server](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=stardog-union.vscode-langserver-shacl) - A VS Code extension providing language intelligence (diagnostics, hover tooltips, auto-completion, etc.) for SHACL via the Language Server Protocol. Similar [VSCode extensions by Stardog](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/search?term=stardog&target=VSCode&category=All%20categories&sortBy=Relevance) are available for other W3C standard languages: Turtle, SPARQL, Trig, etc

Reviewer: Do we really need this mention of "similar extensions"?

Reviewer 3: Maybe something like this? Not sibling plugins, but extension pack?

It is part of the all-in-one extension pack [Stardog/RDF Languages Extension Pack](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=stardog-union.vscode-stardog-languages)

Author: adopted @amivanoff 's suggestion

- SHACL-related specifications
  - [The Shape Topologies algorithm](https://treecg.github.io/specification/shape-topologies)
  - [DASH Data Shapes](https://www.datashapes.org/) - Platform-independent extensions of SHACL for common tasks. Stuff that could become an official standard in the future.
 
- SHACL on Graphs (as discussed in [shacl#22](https://github.com/w3c/shacl/issues/22) and [Inst4CIM-KG#140](https://github.com/Sveino/Inst4CIM-KG/issues/140))

>   - [Data Graph](https://w3c.github.io/data-shapes/shacl/#data-graph) and Shapes Graph (SHACL spec) - the inputs to a SHACL validator, but these are "ephemeral", and spec doesn't concretize how to pass them to the validator.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  <!--lint ignore double-link-->
  - [Data Graph](https://w3c.github.io/data-shapes/shacl/#data-graph) - The input to a SHACL validator (along with the Shapes Graph or SHACL spec), but these are "ephemeral", and spec doesn't concretize how to pass them to the validator.
```

Author: hi @amivanoff , so it ignores the fragment when checking for duplicated links?

Reviewer 3: Yes, it does. We can enable/disable separate linter's rulesets per list item (or globally).

Just put it after "lint ignore" and separate with a space from each other.

- double-link -- checks list item duplication
- awesome-list-item -- checks list item formatting

Examples:

```
<!--lint ignore double-link-->
<!--lint ignore awesome-list-item-->
<!--lint ignore awesome-list-item double-link-->
```

Reviewer 2: The awesome linter "ignores the fragment when checking for duplicated links"? That's not awesome! It should result in feedback to the linter project! Different fragments are different URIs, even if dereferencing both results in the browser displaying approximately the same information.

Author: https://github.com/sindresorhus/awesome-lint/issues/194

Reviewer 3: > The awesome linter "ignores the fragment when checking for duplicated links"?

It does not ignore duplication checking by default. But you could opt-out from specific linter's rules for specific text lines if you need to.

>   - [sh:shapesGraph](https://w3c.github.io/data-shapes/shacl/#sh-shapes-graph) (SHACL spec) - A triple in the data graph that **suggests** which shapes to select for validation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  <!--lint ignore double-link-->
  - [sh:shapesGraph](https://w3c.github.io/data-shapes/shacl/#sh-shapes-graph) (SHACL spec) - A triple in the data graph that **suggests** which shapes to select for validation.
```

>   - `rdf4j:SHACLShapeGraph` (RDF4J extension) - default shape graph in RDF4J (see [this blog](https://www.ontotext.com/blog/shacl-ing-the-data-quality-dragon-iii-a-good-artisan-knows-their-tools/)).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  <!--lint ignore awesome-list-item double-link-->
  - `rdf4j:SHACLShapeGraph` (RDF4J extension) - default shape graph in RDF4J (see [this blog](https://www.ontotext.com/blog/shacl-ing-the-data-quality-dragon-iii-a-good-artisan-knows-their-tools/)).
```

>   - `rsx:DataAndShapesGraphLink, rsx:shapesGraph, rsx:dataGraph` (RDF4J extension) - describe exactly which shapes go with which graphs (see [doc](https://graphdb.ontotext.com/documentation/10.8/shacl-validation.html#union-of-data-graphs-when-validating-the-results) or [this blog](https://www.ontotext.com/blog/shacl-ing-the-data-quality-dragon-iii-a-good-artisan-knows-their-tools/)).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  <!--lint ignore awesome-list-item double-link-->
  - `rsx:DataAndShapesGraphLink, rsx:shapesGraph, rsx:dataGraph` (RDF4J extension) - describe exactly which shapes go with which graphs (see [doc](https://graphdb.ontotext.com/documentation/10.8/shacl-validation.html#union-of-data-graphs-when-validating-the-results) or [this blog](https://www.ontotext.com/blog/shacl-ing-the-data-quality-dragon-iii-a-good-artisan-knows-their-tools/)).
```

>   - [Extending SHACL to RDF Datasets](https://afs.github.io/shacl-datasets.html) - Proposal that describes applying SHACL to RDF Datasets by Jena's author.

Reviewer: I'm a little hesitant to accept vendor-specific extensions in the "Specifications" section.
If we are to include these, maybe add a clear separation from the standards?

Author: is it ok now: https://github.com/w3c-cg/awesome-semantic-shapes/blob/VladimirAlexiev-patch-1/README.md#specifications

[Data Graph](https://w3c.github.io/data-shapes/shacl/#data-graph) and Shapes Graph (SHACL spec) - the inputs to a SHACL validator, but these are "ephemeral", and spec doesn't concretize how to pass them to the validator.
[sh:shapesGraph](https://w3c.github.io/data-shapes/shacl/#sh-shapes-graph) (SHACL spec) - A triple in the data graph that suggests which shapes to select for validation.
rdf4j:SHACLShapeGraph (RDF4J extension) - default shape graph in RDF4J (see [this blog](https://www.ontotext.com/blog/shacl-ing-the-data-quality-dragon-iii-a-good-artisan-knows-their-tools/)).
rsx:DataAndShapesGraphLink, rsx:shapesGraph, rsx:dataGraph (RDF4J extension) - describe exactly which shapes go with which graphs (see [doc](https://graphdb.ontotext.com/documentation/10.8/shacl-validation.html#union-of-data-graphs-when-validating-the-results) or [this blog](https://www.ontotext.com/blog/shacl-ing-the-data-quality-dragon-iii-a-good-artisan-knows-their-tools/)).
[Extending SHACL to RDF Datasets](https://afs.github.io/shacl-datasets.html) (by Jena's author) - Proposal that describes applying SHACL to RDF Datasets.

Author: @tpluscode is it ok now?

Reviewer: Not sure, sorry. Would like a second opinion. @TallTed @amivanoff ?

Author: @TallTed @amivanoff @labra @dontcallmedom Please weigh in here

Reviewer 3: I think, I need to clarify some terminology and initial intentions of this sections (embedded in the initial structure of sections). Maybe we could add it as brief explainers in each section.
 - "Specifications" -- Any more-or-less formal shapes-related useful published document, regardless of it's origin (W3C's, specific vendor's or some expert's) or readiness status (draft/final))
   - "W3C Recommendations" -- The current W3C-recommended specifications (with final status, endorsed by W3C).

Maybe it would be better to break-down "Specifications" into several subsections?

For example:
1. To divide the "Specifications" top-level section into two second-level sections like "SHACL Specifications" and "ShEx Specifications"? The same way as in the case of "SHACL Validators" and "ShEx Validators"?
2. To divide "SHACL Specifications" into several 3-rd level subsections. Like this, and add as brief explainer in each section?
    a. "Current W3C Recommendations"
    b. "Ongoing Work in W3C WG" (I think, "WG SHACL Drafts" as well as "SHACL on Graphs" belongs here). All vendor-spec extensions, related to the new "work-in-progress" features/issues, covered by the new W3C draft, belongs here
    c. "Vendor-Specific Extensions" (which are not in scope of the new spec draft, )
    d. "SHACL-Related Specifications"

Result section structure (section headers):

- Specifications
  - SHACL Specifications
    - Current W3C Recommendations
    - Ongoing Work in W3C WG
    - Vendor-Specific SHACL Extensions
    - SHACL-Related Specifications
  - ShEx Specifications

>   - [Extending SHACL to RDF Datasets](https://afs.github.io/shacl-datasets.html) (by Jena's author) - Proposal that describes applying SHACL to RDF Datasets.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - [Extending SHACL to RDF Datasets](https://afs.github.io/shacl-datasets.html) - Proposal (by Jena's author) that describes one way to apply SHACL to RDF Datasets.
```
